# CSCI 305 Programming Languages

## ML Part 1

**Reading:** Webster Ch. 5

### Instructions
1. Install SML
    * For windows visit [SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/polyml/) and download either *PolyML5.7.1-64bit.msi* or *PolyML5.7.1-32bit.msi*
    * For MacOS follow the instructions [here](http://islovely.co/posts/painless-installation-of-sml-on-os-x/)
    * For Ubuntu Linux based distros follow the instructions:
        - `sudo apt-get install smlnj`
2. [Watch This Video](https://youtu.be/pBwpRivrhN4)
3. Review the [Lecture Slides](slides/Lecture13_14.pdf)
4. Review the [Example Code](https://github.com/CSCI305/csci305-ml-examples/blob/master/ml1.sml)
5. Complete the Out of Class Exercise
6. Check Your Learning
7. Attend Class and Complete the In Class Exercises. Be sure to turn in **Homework 1!**
8. Check Your Learning

### Out of Class Exercise

#### Exercise 1
Write a function `red3` of type `'a * 'b * 'c -> 'a * 'b` that converts a tuple with three elements into one with two by eliminating the second element

#### Exercise 2
Write a function `sqsum` of type `int -> int` that takes a non-negative integer `n` and returns the sum of the squares of all the integers 0 through `n`. Your function need not behave well on inputs less than zero.

#### Check Your Learning:

##### [Solution Video]() - (:)

##### Solution:

**Exercise 1:**
```ml
fun red3 (a, b, c) = (a, c);
```

**Exercise 2:**
```ml
fun sqsum n =
  if n = 0 then 0
  else (n * n) + sqsum (n - 1);
```

### In Class Exercises

#### Exercise 1
Write a function `cube` of type `int -> int` that returns the cube of its parameter.

#### Exercise 2
Write a function `pow` of type `real * int -> real` that raises a real number to an integer power. Your function need not behave well if the integer power is negative.

#### Exercise 3
Write a function `cycle1` of type `'a list -> 'a list` whose output is the same as the input list, but with the first element of the list moved to the end. For example `cycle1 [1,2,3,4]` should return `[2,3,4,1]`

#### Exercise 4
Write a function `min3` of type `int * int * int -> int` that returns the smallest of three integers.

<!--
#### Check Your Learning:

##### [Solution Video]() - (:)

##### Solution:

**Excercise 1:**
```ml
fun cube n = n * n * n;
```

**Excercise 2:**
```ml
fun pow (x:real, n:int) =
  if n = 0 then 1.0
  else x * pow(x, n - 1);
```

**Excercise 3:**
```ml
fun cycle1 x =
  if null x then nil
  else (tl x) @ [hd x];
```

**Exercise 4:**
```ml
fun min3 (a, b, c) =
  if a <= b andalso a <= c then a
  else min3(b, c, a)
```
-->
