# CSCI 305 Programming Languages

## ML Part 1

**Reading:** Webster Ch. 5

### Instructions
1. [Watch This Video](https://youtu.be/pBwpRivrhN4)
2. Review the [Lecture Slides](slides/Lecture13_14.pdf)
3. Review the [Example Code](https://github.com/CSCI305/csci305-ml-examples/blob/master/ml1.sml)
4. Complete the Out of Class Exercise
5. Check Your Learning
6. Attend Class and Complete the In Class Exercises, Be sure you finish and turn in **Ruby Lab!**
7. Check Your Learning

### Out of Class Exercise

#### Exercise 1:
Write a function `max` of type `int list -> int` that returns the largest element of a list of integers. Your function need not behave well if the list is empty. *Hint:*  Write a helper function `maxhelper` that takes as a second parameter the largest element seen so far. Then you can complete the exercise by defining:

```ml
fun max x = maxhelper (tl x, hd x);
```

#### Exercise 2:
Write a function `fourth` of type `'a list -> 'a`  that returns the fourth element of a list. Your function need not behave well on lists with less than four elements.

#### Check Your Learning:

##### [Solution Video]() - (:)

##### Solution:

**Exercise 1:**
```ml
fun maxhelper ([], n) = n
 |  maxhelper ((x::xs), n) =
      if x > n then maxhelper (xs, x)
      else maxhelper (xs, n);

fun max x = maxhelper (tl x, hd x);
```

**Exercise 2:**
```ml
fun fourth x = hd (tl (tl (tl x)));
```

### In Class Exercises

#### Exercise 1:
Write a function `cuber` of type `real -> real` that returns the cube of its parameter.

#### Exercise 2:
Write a function `thirds` of type `string -> char` that returns the third character of a string. Your function need not behave well on strings with lengths less than 3.

#### Exercise 3:
Write a function `del3` of type `'a list -> 'a list` whose output list is the same as the input list, but with the third element deleted. Your function need not behave well on lists with lengths less than 3.

#### Exercise 4:
Write a function `max3` of type `int * int * int -> int` that returns the max value of a set of three values.

<!--
#### Check Your Learning:

##### Solution:

**Exercise 1:**
```ml
fun cuber x:real = x * x * x;
```

**Exercise 2:**
```ml
fun thirds s = hd ( tl ( tl (explode s));
```

**Exercise 3:**
```ml
fun del3 x = (hd x :: hd (tl x) :: nil) @ tl (tl (tl x));
```

**Exercise 4:**
```ml
fun max3 (a, b, c) =
  if a >= b andalso a >= c then a
  else if b >= a andalso b >= c then b
  else c;
```
-->
